I’ve completed the list of variables that we’ll need from the PSID family data and 15 CDS datasets (dropped time use data for this summary) in 1997. Apologies for the delay; it took much longer than I expected to prepare.

A summary is provided below.   These variable sets are primarily drawn from the three papers that use the PSID-CDS data (all attached here). Please check the attached file, and if you’d like to add any notes or edits, you can find the file on Dropbox in the following folder. Please go to the Shared folder, then go to the following path
 \note and refernce files to data\List of variables_CDS and family data_2015_10_10.docx"

If you come across any additional variables that might be useful, please feel free to add them.  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi Joshua

In the first stage, we aim to produce a set of summary statistics and descriptive plots using the CDS-PSID dataset.

To guide this stage, it may be helpful to refer to examples from previous studies (three papers that I attached in my last email). Specifically, Section 4 of Bruno’s paper, Sections 3.1 and 3.4 of Del Boca et al., and Sections 2 and 5 of Caucutt et al. In some cases, the appendices of these papers also contain useful data presentations. These sections can serve as illustrative examples for how to construct, summarise, and visualise the data in our study. You may use other sections from the paper too.

Here is the detailed steps on what we need to to do. Please feel free to reach out if you have any questions => I update the note on Dropbox as well

1-      First, confirm the sample:

a.       I think the same families appear across the 1997, 2002, and 2007 CDS datasets, though there may be some attrition and new additions over time. It would be best to confirm this in the first stage of the analysis.

b.      I think CDS randomly chose households in 1997, and they also randomly picked a maximum of two kids in each household

c.       Is there any change in the sample of parents and kids?

d.      In 1997, I had around 25 observations where kids assigned different primary caregivers, and for one household, we had two primary caregivers. Probably we should know the size of these observations in each year and delete them while we construct summary statistics.  

e.       Think about other issues in the data and document them.

2-      Second, variables from the family dataset

a.       Number of children in the family unit.

b.      Age for both the reference person and spouse/partner

c.       Any information about the age of the kids (e.g., age of the younger kids or older kids)

d.      Information about household size and whether kids live in the household

e.       Number of intended children (if available)

f.        Employment status of both the reference person (formerly “head”) and spouse/partner (formerly “second person”)

g.      Occupation and industry classification for both the reference person and spouse/partner, if employed

h.      Education level for both the reference person and spouse/partner

i.        Marital status

j.        Income level for both the reference person and spouse/partner.

k.      Hours of work for both the reference person and spouse/partner

l.        Wage per hour (or other variable for wage) for both the reference person and spouse/partner,

m.    Household income level

n.      Total annual family-level spending on key durable and non-durable categories.

o.      Main categories of spending: Food, housing, transport, health, education, childcare, Miscellaneous (clothing, recreation, etc.), and so forth

p.      For parental labour supply, wage and income we can check and Del Boca et al, page  35-36 – section 3.1.2 and other papers

q.      If I forgot any other variable please add them to the list

3-      Variables from CDS

a.       Parenting style (Bruno’s paper, page 19)

b.      Time use data

                                                              i.      Kids' time spent on activity and parents spending time on activity (Bruno’s paper, page 20, and Del Boca et al, page 33-35 – section 3.1.1, Caucutt et al’s paper section 5). (1) Active time with the mother, (2) active time with the father, and (3) the child’s productive self-investment time, Note that there are differences between papers here. This difference goes back mainly to how the active time of the mother and father is calculated.

c.       This is a second order and I don’t think we have time before presentation=> Kids' measure of cognitive and non-cognitive (Bruno’s paper, pages 18-19 and Del Boca et al, page 37 - section 3.1.3)

                                                              i.      Kids below 3 do not have data on this (e.g. LW score)

 

Recommended Figure/Descriptive Statistics Order for Paper

1-      Sample and summary Statistics

o   We have a presentation on early November. So it is better to focus on one year before that (we may start with 2002 or 2007, which has data for expenditure, and in the next step, confirm for other years.

o   In the next steps, we can even study Change over Time (Panel Comparison). We can examine whether fertility differences across parenting styles evolve between waves (e.g., 1997 → 2002 → 2007).

2-      Fertility vs. parenting style (main stylised fact)

3-      Labour supply mechanisms

4-      Time-use mechanisms (more important) 

o   Here, breaking down for age of the kids can be important (cited papers did that)

5-      Child outcome correlations  (I don’t think we have time to finalize this before the presentation and it is fine

 

We need summary statistics

We also need to have some graphs. Here are some examples:

1-      Distribution of Fertility by Parenting Style

·         For example, displays median, quartiles, and variability of the number of children within each parenting style. Helps identify differences in central tendency and dispersion

2-      Average Fertility and Confidence Intervals

·         Bar chart with confidence intervals: Each bar represents the mean number of children for a parenting style, with vertical lines showing 95% confidence intervals.

3-      Joint Fertility–Parental Characteristics Patterns

·         Explore how parenting style interacts with parental characteristics linked to fertility decisions. One panel per parenting style showing the relationship between fertility and another continuous variable (e.g., household income or parents education (e.g. collage above and below)).



Open to any other suggestion
----------------------------------------------------------------
 I had this at the bottom of the email, but I am not sure it it was sure clear: we’re presenting in early November at brown bag, so please focus on a single year to start (ideally one with expenditure data, e.g., 2002 or 2007). Once we have summary stats and initial results for that year, we can add another year to confirm whether the sample is comparable and do other robustness checks
------------------------------------------------------------------
When you construct the summary statistics, please consider two approaches (1) consider the weight in the sample (2) don't consider the weight in the sample. I think household weight should be a good measure for most variables (for example, Parenting style, fertility, which are at the family level). For time use calculation, we probably need to check CDS for a suitable weight. 
------------------------------------------------------------------
Perfect, I should be able to grab these quickly. Thank you for the super clear list. I will use 2005 and 2015 as examples again to merge back with the CDS variable list. I will also separately check that they are present in every other TAS year.